# cryptofolio
crypto portfolio analytics

## About
An open source (AGPLv3), local/private tool to help track your defi degen escapades.

 As far as we know, this is the most advanced DeFi accounting analysis tool in existence and has been tested against real wallets with tens of thousands of transactions interacting with hundreds of contracts.

## ALPHA RELEASE
This software is currently an alpha release. Features may be missing, broken, or confusing. There is no friendly UI yet (outside of a CLI and a generated spreadsheet output), the documentation is sparse, and anyone using this should be familiar with Python.

## Disclaimer
This software should not be used in lieu of accounting / tax review. While we believe that the results generated by this software are useful, they are almost guaranteed to be incorrect without manual adjustments. Also, for your convenience, here's the Disclaimer of Warranty from our LICENSE:

```
THERE IS NO WARRANTY FOR THE PROGRAM, TO THE EXTENT PERMITTED BY
APPLICABLE LAW.  EXCEPT WHEN OTHERWISE STATED IN WRITING THE COPYRIGHT
HOLDERS AND/OR OTHER PARTIES PROVIDE THE PROGRAM "AS IS" WITHOUT WARRANTY
OF ANY KIND, EITHER EXPRESSED OR IMPLIED, INCLUDING, BUT NOT LIMITED TO,
THE IMPLIED WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTABILITY AND FITNESS FOR A PARTICULAR
PURPOSE.  THE ENTIRE RISK AS TO THE QUALITY AND PERFORMANCE OF THE PROGRAM
IS WITH YOU.  SHOULD THE PROGRAM PROVE DEFECTIVE, YOU ASSUME THE COST OF
ALL NECESSARY SERVICING, REPAIR OR CORRECTION.
```

## Requirements
You should be familiar with and have [Python 3.8](https://www.python.org/) and [Poetry](https://python-poetry.org/) installed. We won't be providing any support for setting up your software environment. In the future, we'll be building more accessible packaged installer releases.

cryptofolio currently depends on several third party API providers (no configuration is required by default):
* [DeBank OpenAPI](https://open.debank.com/) - provides a helpful list of transaction history per chain
* [CoinGecko API](https://www.coingecko.com/en/api) - provides day-resolution coin prices. No API key is required for but requests will be rate-limited. cryptofolio caches and retries so your initial fetches will be slow, but it should eventually work
    * [Paid API plans](https://www.coingecko.com/en/api/pricing) are supported and can be entered in the initial setup


## Getting Started
Here's how to install:
```
git clone https://github.com/AUGMXNT/cryptofolio
cd cryptofolio
poetry install
```

### Importing data from exchanges
Today, cryptofolio supports importing trade data from Bitcoin.tax, Coinbase, Coinbase Pro, Gemini, and Kraken.

To import data from an exchange you run the command:
```
poetry run bin/import_from_exchange.py --entity_name <peepo> --file <path/to/export/file> --exchange <coinbase|coinbasepro|gemini|kraken|bitcointax> --exchange_account_id <anything_eg_default>
```

- use anything you want for the `--exchange-account-id` parameter; it's just used to help potentially differentiate multiple accounts from the same exchange
- supported exchange names for the `--exchange` parameter are: `coinbase` `coinbasepro` `gemini` `kraken` `bitcointax`
- for the `--file` parameter, see below for which file you need to provide for a given exchange

#### How to export files from supported exchanges
- **Coinbase**
  - Tax Section → Documents → Generate Report → Raw Transaction Activity (can only do for All Time, which is fine). Format should be CSV.
- **Coinbase Pro**
  - Statements → Generate → Account Statement → Select date range and 'All Accounts'. Format should be CSV.
- **Gemini**
  - Account → Settings → Statements and History → Transaction History → Exchange Transaction History → Click the download icon next to this label. Format should be XLSX.
- **Kraken**
  -  History → Export → Select 'Ledgers' and pick date range. Format should be CSV.
- **Bitcoin.Tax**
  - Opening → Download. Format should be CSV.

### Other Usage Notes

`bin/cli.py` should let you do what you need for updating logical and ledger transactions (updatings prices, transactions types). We try to be smart about updating downstream results, although if things look wonky, you may need to re-run `bin/group_transactions.py` on down...

We've included `--help` for some of the options in the various CLI apps as there's some functionality not in this document yet.

Disposals in generated 8949 xlsx sheets internally link to their associated lots with transaction ids and hashes. LibreOffice and Google Sheets have been tested to play nice with our output file.

While the costbasis disposal/income/lot results may be wrong/incomplete, we've included debug data that links to where the disposals drawdown from as well as both ledger and on-chain hashes. We've included a collated "Ledger TXs" sheet as well that includes USD Price and asset assignments so it should be helpful even if you're putting together your disposals manually or using a different tool for accounting (eg, if the current tax treatments or lot matching is not to your liking).

If you run into weird problems, you could try nuking `data/cryptofolio.db` and do a "clean" run (keeping the `cache/cache.db` should be fine and will make runs a lot faster). Also, you can take a look in `logs/` to see if there's more useful info there.

We also recommend [DB Browser for SQLite](https://sqlitebrowser.org/) for spelunking around in `data/cryptofolio.db`

## cryptofolio Tax Behavior
This is currently hard-coded. Here's a summary:

* We do specific-id lot matching, generally HIFO (although we do lowest cost basis for loan repayments), we don't do long-term/short-term optimizations, but the HIFO approach should generally still give near optimal (minimized) tax exposure for US tax rates
* Transfers (including CEX transfers, bridging) are assumed to not be disposal or income. If they are, you should use `bin/cli.py` to manually change the TX type
* Wrapping/unwrapping is also considered non-disposal
* We will create zero-cost basis lots (with a flag) if necessary
* Single-staking or single-asset deposits/withdrawals are treated as deposits, not disposal
* Swaps/LP are like trades and are treated disposals
* We try to do a good job accounting for income from yield or interest (see Tests), however we can't track it currently if the protocol doesn't generate a deposit receipt
* We do a best effort for pricing of LP tokens and try to track receipt tokens properly
* For more details atm, take a look at `cryptofolio/costbasis.py:process()` `cryptofolio/models.py:TxLogical.refresh_type()`
  * current tx types: borrow, repay, deposit, withdraw, disposal, lp, swap, yield
  * we have flags for: receipt, ownership_change, disposal, and income

You may also want to check out [BittyTax](https://github.com/BittyTax/BittyTax), a set of tools to help with UK taxes, or [CoinTaxMan](https://github.com/provinzio/CoinTaxman) for German taxes.

## Notes
* cryptofolio runs as much on your local system as possible, and while we use some third party APIs to make our job easier, our goal is to minimize any PII stored/leaked remotely. We appreciate our privacy and we think others do too.
* This software is licensed with the AGPLv3, a strong copyleft license. This is meant to make sure that end-users of the software will always be able to have control and be able to modify this software to their liking, and as devs, we can maintain optionality/minimize free-riding
* If there's demand/we don't get bored, we may add some (privacy-first) freemium services (higher resolution price/other metadata), access to archival nodes, etc, in the future. In the meantime, if you find this useful or want to support development, donations are gratefully accepted (see below)
* For the exchange imports we've implemented, our HIFO lot matching algorithm almost exactly matches the best-in-class services we've tested (Bitcoin.tax) and beats others like Koinly or CoinTracking which fall down/have bugs (aggressively zero cost-basis transfers, not understanding foreign currency fiat transactions, etc)
* Turns out this stuff is sort of complex, though. We will be publishing some Architectural Decision Records in due time discussing how we handle transactions and cost basis and more
* We think it'll be useful to build a DDL and shared repository to allow community members to extend cryptofolio's ability to understand arbitrary DeFi protocols and strategies
* While the focus of our initial release, taxes are not actually so interesting. Future plans for cryptofolio focus more on the *perf* part:
  * Tracking actual performance of DeFi investment strategies (performance vs benchmarks/hodling, accounting for transaction costs, tax efficiency)
  * Farming/claim calculations and helpers
  * You can see a preview of some of that sort of thing here: https://github.com/AUGMXNT/frax-analysis/

## Did You Know?
This is definitely **NOT** tax advice, but in the US, if you [file an extension](https://www.irs.gov/forms-pubs/extension-of-time-to-file-your-tax-return), and don't make an adequate prepayment, you will owe a [Failure to Pay Penalty](https://www.irs.gov/payments/failure-to-pay-penalty) of 0.5%/mo (6% APR). [Interesting, right?](https://coindix.com/?kind=stable&sort=-apy&tvl=1m)
* Note, the [Failure to File Penalty](https://www.irs.gov/payments/failure-to-file-penalty) is 5%/mo if you don't get things sorted by the time your extension period ends
